Spruce Knob
===========

Hardware
--------


Queues
------


Environment modules
-------------------

The current state and limits of queues can be found using the qstat
command.

::

    $> qstat -q

    server: srih0001.hpc.wvu.edu

    Queue            Memory CPU Time Walltime Node  Run Que Lm  State
    ---------------- ------ -------- -------- ----  --- --- --  -----
    admin              --      --       --      --    0   0 --   E R
    ahismail           --      --       --      --    6   1 --   E R
    alromero           --      --       --      --   13   5 --   E R
    bts0019            --      --       --      --    0   0 --   D S
    bvpopp             --      --       --      --    7   0 --   E R
    cedumitrescu       --      --       --      --   12  12 --   E R
    comm_256g_mem      --      --    168:00:0   --    4   5 --   E R
    comm_gpu           --      --    168:00:0   --    3   1 --   E R
    comm_large_mem     --      --    168:00:0   --    5 268 --   E R
    comm_mmem_day      --      --    24:00:00   --    9  38 --   E R
    comm_mmem_week     --      --    168:00:0   --   71 264 --   E R
    comm_smp           --      --    168:00:0   --    6   0 --   E R
    debug              --      --    00:15:00   --    0   0 --   E R
    dsmebane           --      --       --      --    2   0 --   E R
    genomics_core      --      --       --      --   16 300 --   E R
    gmunu              --      --       --      --    0   0 --   E R
    gspirou            --      --       --      --    0   0 --   E R
    jaspeir            --      --       --      --    0   0 --   E R
    jbmertz            --      --       --      --    3   2 --   E R
    jbmertz_gpu        --      --       --      --    2   0 --   E R
    jplewis            --      --       --      --    8 114 --   E R
    jplewis_large      --      --       --      --    0   0 --   E R
    jshawkins          --      --       --      --    0   0 --   E R
    jthibaul           --      --       --      --    0   0 --   D R
    mcwilliams_gpu     --      --       --      --    0   0 --   E R
    sp0045             --      --       --      --   13   0 --   E R
    spdifazio          --      --       --      --   25 600 --   E R
    standby            --      --    04:00:00   --  271 538 --   E R
    stmcwilliams       --      --       --      --    1   0 --   E R
    stmcwilliams_lp    --      --       --      --    1   0 --   E R
    tdmusho            --      --       --      --    0   0 --   E R
    testqueue          --      --       --      --    0   0 --   E R
    training           --      --       --      --    0   0 --   D S
    vyakkerman         --      --       --      --   13   0 --   E R
    zbetienne          --      --       --      --    1   0 --   E R
                                                   ----- -----
                                                     495  2148

There are three main queue types - research team queues, the standby
queue, and community node queues.

Research Team Queues
--------------------

Research teams that have bought their own compute nodes have private
queues that link all their compute nodes together. Only users given
permission from the research team's buyer (Usually the labs PI) will
have permission to directly submit jobs to these queues. While these are
private queues - unused resources/compute nodes from these queues will
be available to the standby queue (see below). However, per the
system-wide policies, all research team's compute nodes must be
available to the research team's users within 4 hours of job submission.
By default, these queues are regulated by first come, first serve
queuing. However, individual research teams can ask for different
settings for their respective queue, and should
`contact <Getting Help>`__ the RC HPC team with these requests.

Standby Queue
-------------

The standy queue is for using resources from research teams queues that
are not currently being used. Priority on the standby queue is set by
fair share queuing. This means that user priority is assigned based on a
combination of the size of the job and how much system resources the
user have used during the given week, with higher priority assigned to
larger jobs and/or user jobs that have used fewer system resources in
the week. Further, the standby queue has a 4 hour wall time.

Community Node Queues
---------------------

Spruce Knob has several queues that start with the word 'comm'. These
queues are linked to the 51 compute nodes bought using NSF funding
sources, and as such is open for Statewide Academic use,
hardware/resource information can be found on the `Spruce Knob Systems
page <Systems_Spruce>`__ These queues are separated by node type (i.e.
large memory, gpu, smp) and can be used by all users. Currently, these
nodes are regulated by fair share queuing. This means that user priority
is assigned based on a combination of the size of the job and how much
system resources the user have used during the given week, with higher
priority assigned to larger jobs and/or user jobs that have used less
system resources in the week. Further, all community queues have a 24
hour wall time, except for the week long medium memory queue
(comm\_mmem\_week). comm\_mmem\_week allows jobs up to a week (168
hours); however, this queue class also limits the maximum number of
nodes to 11, and a single user can not exceed 80 CPUs total within this
queue. These restrictions are set to prevent a single user occupying a
large number of the community resources for an excessively long time.
