.. _qs-storage:

Storage
=======

Home Directory
--------------

Home directories on Spruce Knob are located in /users directory and is
the default login location for users. The default disk quota for each
user is 10 Gb. As such, we recommend that home directories use should be
primarily to store scripts, binary executables and other small data file
types. For research data, users should use Spruce Knobs Scratch space.

This data is backed up on a daily basis via snapshots and tape. Users
can retrieve up to 4 weeks of older files from
/users/.snapshots/{date}/$USER if needed. If files are not available in
the snapshot, please contact helpdesk@hpc.wvu.edu and the HPC team will
attempt to retrieve the data from tape.

Note: Users may check their storage quota via the following command:

::

    quota

Scratch Directory
-----------------

Scratch directories are located in /scratch directory, and can be easily
moved to using the $SCRATCH environment variable set-up by default for
each user.

::

    cd $SCRATCH

Scratch directories on Spruce Knob are treated as true scratch space:
There is no user defined quota for space. All users scratch directories
share the same file space, which is set at 130 Tb. When the scratch
directory becomes full, files are automatically deleted by date. To
facilitate this, all users should use their scratch space as true
temporary storage. However, we will notify users well in advanced for
schedule file deletions to give users ample time to remove data to
prevent data loss.

**Note: Scratch data is NOT backed up.**

Persistent Group Storage
------------------------

Research groups may purchase long term persistent storage from the RC
HPC. This storage allows users to keep data on the cluster that will not
be removed. In addition, this storage utilizes the same GPFS file system
so files can be written directly to this storage from jobs executing on
the cluster.

Persistent storage must be purchased in 1 TB chunks. To purchase this
storage, go to https://helpdesk.hpc.wvu.edu ,select "Open a New Ticket",
and select "Dedicated Storage Order" from Help Topic. For more
information, please contact helpdesk@hpc.wvu.edu.

For groups who have purchased this storage, it can be accessed here:

::

    cd /group/{group_name}

**Note: Persistent group storage is NOT backed up.**

**Note: Persistent Group storage has been replaced by a the new
`Research Data Depot
Service <https://wvu.teamdynamix.com/TDClient/KB/ArticleDet?ID=35328>`__.**

Archival Storage
----------------

Please see the `Research Data Depot
Service <https://wvu.teamdynamix.com/TDClient/KB/ArticleDet?ID=35328>`__
for archival storage options.

For additional information please contact helpdesk@hpc.wvu.edu.
